The African Union (AU) is a continental union consisting of 55 member states located on the continent of Africa, with exception of various territories of European possessions located in Africa. The bloc was founded on 26 May 2001 in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia and launched on 9 July 2002 in South Africa.[6] The intention of the AU is to replace the Organisation of African Unity (OAU), established on 25 May 1963 in Addis Ababa by 32 signatory governments. The most important decisions of the AU are made by the Assembly of the African Union, a semi-annual meeting of the heads of state and government of its member states. The AU's secretariat, the African Union Commission, is based in Addis Ababa.

In result of its geographical location, the African Union has an area of around 29 million km2 (11 million sq mi) and includes popular world landmarks, including the Sahara and the Nile.[7] They have adopted a gold, green and red based emblem and flag to represent the continental union, where they held a competition for citizens to design a flag in which they chose a submission to replace the old flag. Their main celebration occurs on Africa Day on 25 May. The primary languages spoken include Arabic, English, French and Portuguese and the languages of Africa. Within the African Union, there are official bodies such as the Peace and Security Council and the Pan-African Parliament.
Contents

    1 Overview
    2 History
        2.1 Treaties
    3 Geography
    4 Demographics
        4.1 Population
        4.2 Languages
    5 Politics
        5.1 Membership
        5.2 Governance
        5.3 Selection of chair
        5.4 Headquarters
        5.5 African Union Summits
    6 Foreign relations
        6.1 Africa–China relations
    7 Economy
        7.1 Indicators
    8 Culture
        8.1 Symbols
    9 Celebration
    10 Current issues
        10.1 AIDS in Africa
        10.2 Corruption
        10.3 Libya
        10.4 Military
        10.5 Regional conflicts and peacekeeping
    11 See also
    12 References
    13 Bibliography
    14 External links

Overview

The objectives of the AU are the following:

    To achieve greater unity, cohesion and solidarity between the African countries and African nations.
    To defend the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of its Member States.
    To accelerate the political and social-economic integration of the continent.
    To promote and defend African common positions on issues of interest to the continent and its peoples.
    To encourage international cooperation, taking due account of the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
    To promote peace, security, and stability on the continent.
    To promote democratic principles and institutions, popular participation and good governance.
    To promote and protect human and peoples' rights in accordance with the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights and other relevant human rights instruments.
    To establish the necessary conditions which enable the continent to play its rightful role in the global economy and in international negotiations.
    To promote sustainable development at the economic, social and cultural levels as well as the integration of African economies.
    To promote co-operation in all fields of human activity to raise the living standards of African peoples.
    To coordinate and harmonise the policies between the existing and future Regional Economic Communities for the gradual attainment of the objectives of the Union.
    To advance the development of the continent by promoting research in all fields, in particular in science and technology.
    To work with relevant international partners in the eradication of preventable diseases and the promotion of good health on the continent.

The African Union is made up of both political and administrative bodies. The highest decision-making organ is the Assembly of the African Union, made up of all the heads of state or government of member states of the AU. The Assembly is chaired by Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, President of Egypt. The AU also has a representative body, the Pan African Parliament, which consists of 265 members elected by the national legislatures of the AU member states. Its president is Roger Nkodo Dang.

Other political institutions of the AU include:

    the Executive Council, made up of foreign ministers, which prepares decisions for the Assembly;
    the Permanent Representatives Committee, made up of the ambassadors to Addis Ababa of AU member states; and
    the Economic, Social, and Cultural Council (ECOSOCC), a civil society consultative body.

The AU Commission, the secretariat to the political structures, is chaired by Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma of South Africa. On 15 July 2012, Ms. Dlamini-Zuma won a tightly contested vote to become the first female head of the African Union Commission, replacing Jean Ping of Gabon.

Other AU structures are hosted by different member states:

    the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights is based in Banjul, the Gambia; and
    the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) and APRM Secretariats and the Pan-African Parliament are in Midrand, South Africa.

The AU's first military intervention in a member state was the May 2003 deployment of a peacekeeping force of soldiers from South Africa, Ethiopia, and Mozambique to Burundi to oversee the implementation of the various agreements. AU troops were also deployed in Sudan for peacekeeping during Darfur conflict, before the mission was handed over to the United Nations on 1 January 2008 UNAMID. The AU has also sent a peacekeeping mission to Somalia, of which the peacekeeping troops are from Uganda and Burundi.

The AU has adopted a number of important new documents establishing norms at continental level, to supplement those already in force when it was created. These include the African Union Convention on Preventing and Combating Corruption (2003), the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance (2007), the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) and its associated Declaration on Democracy, Political, Economic and Corporate Governance.[8]
History
Main articles: History of the African Union and History of Africa

The historical foundations of the African Union originated in the First Congress of Independence African States, held in Accra, Ghana, from 15 to 22 April 1958. The conference aimed at forming the Africa Day, to mark the liberation movement each year concerning the willingness of the African people to free themselves from foreign dictatorship, as well as subsequent attempts to unite Africa, including the Organisation of African Unity (OAU), which was established on 25 May 1963, and the African Economic Community in 1981. [9] Critics argued that the OAU in particular did little to protect the rights and liberties of African citizens from their own political leaders, often dubbing it the "Dictators' Club".[10]

The idea of creating the AU was revived in the mid-1990s under the leadership of Libyan head of state Muammar al-Gaddafi: the heads of state and government of the OAU issued the Sirte Declaration (named after Sirte, in Libya) on 9 September 1999, calling for the establishment of an African Union. The Declaration was followed by summits at Lomé in 2000, when the Constitutive Act of the African Union was adopted, and at Lusaka in 2001, when the plan for the implementation of the African Union was adopted. During the same period, the initiative for the establishment of the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD), was also established.

The African Union was launched in Durban on 9 July 2002, by its first chairperson, South African Thabo Mbeki, at the first session of the Assembly of the African Union. The second session of the Assembly was in Maputo in 2003, and the third session in Addis Ababa on 6 July 2004.

Since 2010, the African Union eyes the establishment of a joint African space agency.[11][12][13][14]

Barack Obama was the first ever sitting United States president to speak in front of the African Union in Addis Ababa, on 29 July 2015. With his speech, he encouraged the world to increase economic ties via investments and trade with the continent, and lauded the progresses made in education, infrastructure and economy. But he also criticised lacks of democracy and leaders who refuse to step down, discrimination against minorities (LGBT people, religious groups and ethnicities) and corruption. He suggested an intensified democratisation and free trade, to significantly increase living quality for Africans.[15][16]
Treaties
Signed
In force
Document 	1961
1962 	1963
1965
OAU Charter 	1991
N/A
Abuja Treaty 	1999
2002
Sirte Declaration 	Pix.gif 	Pix.gif 	Pix.gif 	Pix.gif 	Pix.gif 	Pix.gif 	Pix.gif 	Pix.gif
  	  	  	  									
  	Organisation of African Unity (OAU) 	African Economic Community: (AEC) 										
  	Community of Sahel-Saharan States (CEN-SAD) 	
  	Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) 	
  	East African Community (EAC) 	
  	Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS) 	
  	Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) 	
  	Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) 	
  	Southern African Development Community (SADC) 	
  	Arab Maghreb Union (AMU) 	
Casablanca Group 		African Union (AU)
Monrovia Group
  	  	  	

    vte

Geography
Main article: Geography of the African Union

Member states of the African Union cover almost the entirety of continental Africa, except for several territories held by Spain (Canary Islands, Plazas de soberanía); France (Mayotte, Réunion, Scattered Islands in the Indian Ocean); Portugal (Madeira, Savage Islands); and the United Kingdom (Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha). Consequently, the geography of the African Union is wildly diverse, including the world's largest hot desert (the Sahara), huge jungles and savannas, and the world's longest river (the Nile).

The AU presently has an area of 29,922,059 square kilometres (11,552,972 sq mi), with 24,165 kilometres (15,015 mi) of coastline. The vast majority of this area is on continental Africa, while the only significant territory off the mainland is the island of Madagascar (the world's fourth largest island), accounting for slightly less than 2% of the total.
Demographics
Population
Main article: Demographics of Africa
Main articles: Member states of the African Union and demographics of African Union

Total population of the African Union as of 2017 is estimated at more than 1.25 billion, with a growth rate of more than 2.5% p.a
Languages
Main article: Languages of the African Union

According to the Constitutive Act of the African Union, its working languages are Arabic, English, French and Portuguese, and African languages "if possible".[17] A protocol amending the Constitutive Act, adopted in 2003 but as of June 2016 not yet ratified by a two-thirds majority of member states, would add Spanish, Swahili and "any other African language" and declare all "official" (rather than "working") languages of the African Union.[18] The Executive Council shall determine the process and practical modalities for the use of official languages as working languages.

Founded in 2001 under the auspices of the AU, the African Academy of Languages promotes the usage and perpetuation of African languages among African people. The AU declared 2006 the Year of African Languages.[19][20] 2006 also marked Ghana's 55th anniversary since it founded the Bureau of Ghana Languages originally known as Gold Coast Vernacular Literature Bureau.
Politics
African Union
Map of the African Union.svg
This article is part of a series on the
politics and government of
the African Union
Institutions
[show]
Executive
[show]
Legislature
[show]
Judiciary
[show]
Advisory bodies
[show]
Financial bodies
[show]
Decentralised bodies
[show]
Related topics
[show]

    Other countries Atlas

    vte

The African Union has a number of official bodies:

Pan-African Parliament (PAP)
    To become the highest legislative body of the African Union. The seat of the PAP is at Midrand, South Africa. The Parliament is composed of 265 elected representatives from all 55 AU states, and intended to provide popular and civil-society participation in the processes of democratic governance. Its president is Roger Nkodo Dang, of Cameroon.
Assembly of the African Union
    Composed of heads of state and heads of government of AU states, the Assembly is currently the supreme governing body of the African Union. It is gradually devolving some of its decision-making powers to the Pan African Parliament. It meets once a year and makes its decisions by consensus or by a two-thirds majority. The current chair of the AU is Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi.
African Union Commission (or Authority) 
    The secretariat of the African Union, composed of ten commissioners and supporting staff and headquartered in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. In a similar fashion to its European counterpart, the European Commission, it is responsible for the administration and co-ordination of the AU's activities and meetings.
Court of Justice of the African Union
    The Constitutive Act provides for a Court of Justice to rule on disputes over interpretation of AU treaties. A protocol to set up this Court of Justice was adopted in 2003 and entered into force in 2009. It was, however, superseded by a protocol creating an African Court of Justice and Human Rights, which will incorporate the already established African Court on Human and Peoples' Rights (see below) and have two chambers: one for general legal matters and one for rulings on the human rights treaties.
Executive Council
    Composed of ministers designated by the governments of member states. It decides on matters such as foreign trade, social security, food, agriculture and communications, is accountable to the Assembly, and prepares material for the Assembly to discuss and approve.It is chaired by Mr Shawn Makuyana of Zimbabwe (2015–).
Permanent Representatives' Committee
    Consisting of nominated permanent representatives of member states, the Committee prepares the work for the Executive Council, similar the role